(00:00:00.000) Erika Kramer: Any trouble hearing me?

(00:00:02.100) Alex Wyatt: Know, I can hear you. You're good.

(00:00:03.400) Erika Kramer: Good. I don't usually use headphones, so I just wanted to check. Okay.

(00:00:07.600) Alex Wyatt: Awesome. How has your week been going?

(00:00:11.000) Erika Kramer: It's great—busy, but all good stuff. How about you?

(00:00:13.700) Alex Wyatt: Pretty good, about the same?

(00:00:17.200) Erika Kramer: Great.

(00:00:17.500) Alex Wyatt: You

(00:00:18.000) Erika Kramer: Looking forward to talking with you today.

(00:00:20.500) Alex Wyatt: Me too. I'm gonna resend you the questions. Just to check, you're all good with it, and then I will start my transcribing.

(00:00:28.300) Erika Kramer: Sounds great. Oh, I. Yep, if you'd want to just throw them in the chat, that's perfect for me.

(00:00:35.600) Alex Wyatt: Awesome.

(00:00:36.200) Erika Kramer: Oh, perfect. Excellent. Excellent. Well, we would—perfect. Yeah, I'm ready when you are. All right.

(00:00:55.900) Alex Wyatt: Thank you so much. I'm gonna start it right now. Um, welcome in and thank you so much for meeting with me. Could you please describe your current role supporting individuals who use AAC devices?

(00:01:10.900) Erika Kramer: Absolutely. My current role: I am a speech language pathologist and I am still licensed and practicing, but I am now a full-time doctoral student who is researching barriers and facilitators to providing AAC, specifically speech generating devices, for students who are in public schools who need that in order to access their academic environment.

(00:01:39.000) Alex Wyatt: Thank you so much for sharing that. Can you share what population, whether age or disability type or severity of children, you have supported?

(00:01:49.300) Erika Kramer: Absolutely. So my career—I am currently in year 17 of being a practicing SLP, and I have worked with a wide variety of people who benefit from AAC in order to communicate. I have clinical experience supporting teenagers all the way through adults who have had acquired disability, due typically to something neurological. So whether they have a newly acquired disability in communicating because of something like a traumatic brain injury or a stroke, or what we call cerebral vascular accident or CVA, or something neuroprogressive such as ALS or Parkinson's disease, MS, those types of needs. But through that work, I began also supporting young adults with developmental disabilities and helping them get successful access to AAC. So I started working with adults in their 20s who had developmental diagnoses such as cerebral palsy, Down syndrome, autism, and that then led me to working in schools. In my school capacity, I have supported lots of wonderful, amazing kiddos with a wide range of abilities and needs. But most of my work was supporting elementary-age students with eligibility categories of either autism, intellectual disability, or multiple disabilities, and actually add speech language impairment. I had some students with AAC needs who—that's their eligibility category. So, to add on to that, I've supported students in a school setting who are receiving adapted curriculum, and they take what in North Carolina we call the NC Extend. So it is not the state test like the EOG, but it is an adapted version of the state test. Students on that curriculum track do not graduate with a standard high school diploma; they graduate with what's called a certificate. But I've also supported students who use AAC who are in general education settings and are on track to receive a standardized high school diploma.

(00:04:30.000) Alex Wyatt: Thank you so much for sharing all of that. I can see you've worked with a very broad range of people and abilities. Throughout your work, what are the most common misconceptions you've seen about AAC devices and specifically SGD devices?

(00:04:45.400) Erika Kramer: Just, I think the biggest misconception is it'll prevent this child from developing verbal communication skills. You know, for a lot of parents—and this is not a judgment or a criticism on them—but they love their children and they have high expectations for their child, and their goal is for their child to develop verbal communication skills. And so a misconception is that if we use something like a speech generating device, bring in AAC, that the child will become lazy. You know, they won't try to talk or they won't need to talk verbally because they have this tool. And what we know through the evidence base and the research is that is actually very false. It's the opposite. Providing students with a communication support like a speech generating device—we have solid evidence that actually helps facilitate development of verbal communication skills, and it can springboard language.

(00:05:52.600) Alex Wyatt: Well, I did not know that. I know you already just mentioned a few, but what are some of the most common benefits you've seen with AAC devices?

(00:06:01.700) Erika Kramer: Oh my goodness. Where do I begin? So many. If I had to list the number one most powerful, I think benefit, it's autonomy. Having a voice or a way to communicate gives us power and gives us autonomy over what happens to our bodies, the choices that we want, what I like, what I do and do not want to do. It also allows us to share what we know, you know, being able to indicate I have thoughts, I have feelings, I have ideas, I have preferences. And having an AAC device for somebody who is non-speaking, that is the tool that allows them all those things that are inside them to be heard and understood. Academically, if we just... That is something I'm very interested in, AAC for students in school. That is also the tool that allows us to access our academic environment, so to be able to acquire skills like literacy, reading, writing, mathematics skills, science. Without a tool to be able to express what I know and have it modeled for me so I can learn and what, you know, that's necessary in order for a lot of students to have access to their academic environment and to learn.

(00:07:31.900) Alex Wyatt: That is definitely extremely beneficial, like the special, because autonomy is so important, especially for people who have different ways of communication.

(00:07:43.100) Erika Kramer: Absolutely.

(00:07:44.700) Alex Wyatt: What barriers have you seen in regards to these devices?

(00:07:50.100) Erika Kramer: For us, SGDs, the largest barrier I have run into is funding, and that's for me personally. I say this because I have specialized interest in AAC, and so throughout my career I've sought professional development. I have done workshops, I've gotten additional certifications in order to be very knowledgeable and proficient at assessing AAC. Within my field, I could tell you one of the biggest barriers is SLP knowledge and confidence in supporting AAC. That hasn't been a barrier for me personally, but I want to acknowledge that. I think I'm an outlier in my field. For me, the biggest barrier is I have the knowledge, I know what I want to do, I know it will help this individual, but now nobody will pay for it or the amount of money it costs is astronomical. And insurance has a very large co-pay or the school system says, well, just do something cheaper. Use a printed off core board that you can just, you know, make on a computer and print. And again, there's reasons that can benefit some students, but SGDs have benefits of their own, and I could really go down a rabbit hole on that if you want later, but access to funding for me is the biggest one. The second largest barrier would then be having a collaborative team that has confidence and time to receive training, to collaborate, to make sure we're all supporting a student. So the student is getting modeling and instruction to be successful at the device, even if the SLP's not in the room with them. So this, having the special education teacher, making sure they feel knowledgeable and they feel confident, and having the time, you know, if they don't feel confident, having the time in their schedule and my schedule that we can support each other. You know, we work really collaboratively, but sometimes the biggest barrier is just as a special education teacher, they have no time during the day, they are busy 24/7 because they get minimal support and they really can't leave their room because of the nature of the students that they're supporting and the limited support they have in their classroom. And so, like, to be able to take 30 minutes to come meet with me so we can practice this device and I can teach you, that is... And my schedule gets busy in a school, like I have a very full case. I've got meetings, I've got therapy sessions I'm trying to do, I'm trying to evaluate students, and so I think that's a secondary barrier, but the funding source for me is a big one.

(00:10:44.800) Alex Wyatt: Thank you so much for mentioning your experience with that. I have heard funding brought up a few times, but I hadn't heard before the confidence in getting the AT training. So thank you so much for mentioning that.

(00:10:56.600) Erika Kramer: course, would

(00:10:56.900) Alex Wyatt: you be willing to share which either versions or brands of devices? You have used sdg and non sdg

(00:11:04.100) Erika Kramer: Absolutely. So let's go speech generating device first. I have used what we consider mid-tech devices. So those would be things like GoTalks, which are fixed but with different sized grids, where you push and it's something you would verbally record for the student, but it's not dynamic in nature. The screen doesn't move. I have used Mac button switches, which are single message switches, or Step-by-Steps, which is where you can kind of sequence three different messages if you do three hits on a button. More dynamic, high-tech displays I have used obviously are tablet-based things like iPads and Android-based tablets with different programs or apps on them. Specific apps I have used include TouchChat, LAMP Words for Life or Language Acquisition through Motor Planning Words for Life. I have used TD Snap. I have used CoughDrop. I have used Grid. I have used something called Predictable, which is more text-based, so it's really good for word prediction for somebody who has literacy skills and is doing a lot of typing to text. I have used Compass Navigator, which is through Tobii Dynavox. Oh, I'm trying to remember Tobii Dynavox, the name of—there's another app or software that is more for use in a medical setting or for adults who have acquired communication challenges, and I'm trying to—not Compass. Give me a second, I'll have to look up and remember the name of that one. And then as far as no-tech or light-tech, I mean umpteen different things. I have done Boardmaker and made communication choice boards. I have done the Project Core website out of the University of North Carolina in Chapel Hill. They have really wonderful ready-made core boards that anybody can download and print for free. So I have used resources from them. I have also done 3D models or 3D printed versions of core words for students with sensory impairment, like visual disabilities, where they can't see the screen or they can't see the communication board, but they can hold the symbol that feels a very specific way, has a certain shape, has a certain texture, and that equates to this vocabulary word that we're learning.

(00:13:43.600) Alex Wyatt: Thank you so much for sharing that.

(00:13:45.700) Erika Kramer: Oh I'm sorry and I'm sorry, I talked about all the apps on iPads. I've also utilized high-tech AAC for switch scanning access so this would be a user who is not able to use their finger to touch the screen. We have a button that is hooked to it and the we program the app so that it scans through the choices. So all the you know, we have a grid and it might say Row one row, two Row, three, and the user they know what is in Rouen. They know what is in road to? When they hear the road they want, they hit the switch. We position the switch at the most reliable movement they have. So for some people I have worked at that might be the back of their head and it's on a hat, the switches on the headrest of their wheelchair when they hear the row that they want to select. They push their head back and it selects it and then it'll begin saying option one option, two option, three. This could be used for word choices. I've also had people that use this system for spelling so all their letters are in rows and they just listen for the letter they want and when they hear it they click and that's how they generate their message. So we call that switch scanning. I've also used eye gaze access for direct selection. So those are cameras on the bottom of a high-tech device that track the user's eye movement and their eyes act like a computer mouse. And so when they look and stare or dwell on their target, it'll select it. And finally, I've used head trackers. So little dots that are metallic that are tracked by a camera, where you move your head, like a mouse. And again, it has to do with dwell time and as you dwell on something long enough, That's something you set for each User. It's really specific to them. It'll select. So those would be more alternative access things I've worked with.

(00:15:43.700) Alex Wyatt: I haven't heard of a lot of those before, so I'm definitely going to look up a few of those, especially with scanning. I've not heard that before.

(00:15:50.700) Erika Kramer: Yeah.

(00:15:51.300) Alex Wyatt: Um could you explain why your experience or if you have experience with AC users who are multilingual and if you've noticed any other specific benefits or barriers in relation,

(00:16:05.100) Erika Kramer: Absolutely. So back in my hospital work, I did support a young woman who is bilingual. She has Down syndrome and she is bilingual, she has English and Spanish, just like her siblings, but her mom and dad primarily speak Spanish, that's their family language and their home, and so we needed a device for her that could flip back and forth between English and Spanish. So I would say the facilitator, that was Tobii Dynavox, was the system we went with and we chose the app, their TD Snap. It did have the ability to flip page sets, so you could go into settings and change your vocabulary file from English to Spanish. So that was nice, that was a built-in option. The barriers to that is there were a lot of steps. This individual has Down syndrome and so training a complicated sequence, like changing her page set to a different language, was something that took a lot of time. It wasn't a very quick, intuitive, easy thing. The other barrier was that it was double work and not that it's a problem, I don't mind doing that, but any time we programmed a new button or a new vocabulary file on her English page set, it didn't automatically pop up in the Spanish page set. We would have to hand make that, and Spanish is not my first language, so I would have to get a certified interpreter to join me to make sure that we were creating the page in Spanish with efficacy and validity, because I don't know what I'm doing in Spanish. My other experience is most recently in schools, I was supporting quite a few families who have immigrated to this country from India. And India is a country that has many, many, many multiple languages because of the regional dialects that are unique to this large country. So most of my families had very strong English skills and they would offer interpreters at meetings and they would not, they said they did not need them. But I know that they also had multi-generations living in their home. So a lot of my students had grandma or grandpa in the home and grandma and grandpa are people they're communicating with, but they don't speak English and I really could not find any page sets. It was really challenging to find any AAC page sets that I could mirror the English version in the very unique dialect for their region in India. I could not, it was really hard to find those things.

(00:18:54.000) Alex Wyatt: Thank you for sharing your experience with that. What design aspects do you think would be beneficial to include?

(00:19:03.000) Erika Kramer: For multilingual users, yeah. So things have progressed so much now, and with the advances, especially in AI, I think the barrier of having to duplicate things—like I did this in English and now I have to remake it again in Spanish—I feel like it would be really cool if I made an adjustment in one language, it would automatically be added in the secondary language that the program knows I need both of these languages. Also, having just a one-button touch to flip the language versus having to go into the file and download it and resave—I think that would be incredibly helpful to be able to just one hit, and the system just flips to my other language without me having to do a multi-step process to get to this new language's page, stats, and vocabulary files.

(00:20:04.700) Alex Wyatt: That is something I do think is important because if it's not intuitive and easy to switch over, it kind of defeats the purpose of it.

(00:20:13.000) Erika Kramer: Yeah.

(00:20:15.300) Alex Wyatt: Is there anything else that you would like to share about your experience supporting individuals who use AAC, specifically multilingual users?

(00:20:27.300) Erika Kramer: I just think in general, especially in a school setting, we are really focusing on providing AAC in English because that's what we're teaching in. And the AAC device, if the school is providing it, is for the academic environment and to access the academic setting. But we do have a mandate to train and support families, and if the family at home is not, if English is not their primary language, I think we have a responsibility to consider the whole language. There's a really wonderful document I can send you that the US—I don't remember if I already provided it, but it's called Myths and Facts in AT in Schools, and it is a document that the United States Department of Education published in January of 2024. Um, but one of the myths is that it's not the school's responsibility to train the family in how to use the assistive technology, and this document says that is a myth. The fact is an IEP team is responsible for providing training on the assistive technology device to the family. And if English is not that family's first language, then we need to have a system that can flip between English and the home language. It's important.

(00:21:43.200) Alex Wyatt: I do agree with that, and I do not believe I see the website, but I will order the link. I am very interested in looking at that.

(00:21:51.000) Erika Kramer: I would give it to you right now. Give me just a moment.

(00:21:53.800) Alex Wyatt: Thank you.

(00:21:54.900) Erika Kramer: Of course. Here we go. So, I'm going to put it in our chat, and if you click, there's a hyperlink at this doc on the site at the top, and it's like a PDF. It's really well organized. It's very practitioner-focused. It's easy to understand, but it's like a 20-page document, not super long, and it's broken up into four chapters. They go through the myths and the facts regarding assistive technology delivery in schools, and AAC is one type of assistive technology. It is a very common type of assistive technology that is required for a child to access their education in a school setting.

(00:22:59.500) Alex Wyatt: thank you so much for sending this. Now that I have had an interview with you and I had an interview. Was another grad student. Who is Richard? Who's researching multilingual Ace capabilities? I'm going to kind of take my information and then the sources provided and start to categorize and organize them. And I would love to share that with you over the coming weeks outside. I do it. If you have any advice or anything, you would like to add.

(00:23:25.800) Erika Kramer: Oh, of course Alex, I would love to help you with that.

(00:23:29.800) Alex Wyatt: Thank you so much,

(00:23:31.200) Erika Kramer: of course. Do you have any additional questions for me?

(00:23:35.400) Alex Wyatt: I think that is all I have for today.

(00:23:38.000) Erika Kramer: Awesome,

(00:23:39.100) Alex Wyatt: well,

(00:23:39.600) Erika Kramer: Thank you for your time. I love that this is something you're passionate about researching. It makes my heart so happy.

(00:23:44.400) Alex Wyatt: Thank you. Thank you so much for meeting with me about this, and have a great rest of your day.

(00:23:48.600) Erika Kramer: We'll talk soon. You have a good rest of your day, too.

(00:23:51.000) Alex Wyatt: You too.

(00:23:51.900) Erika Kramer: Bye.